[1]

CHEMISTRY Section-A Questions No. 1 to 16 are Multiple Choice type questions carrying 1 mark each.
1.
In an electrochemical cell, the following reaction takes place:

2Cu+ (aq) + Zn(s) → 2Cu(s) + Zn2+ (aq)

cell E 1.28V  =

As the reaction progresses, what will happen to the overall voltage of the cell?

(A) Voltage will remain constant.

(B) It will decrease as [Zn2+] increases.

(C) It will increase as [Cu+] increases.

(D) It will increase as [Zn2+] increases.

2.
Out of Fe3+, Sc3+, Cr3+ and Co3+ ions, the one which is colourless in aqueous solution is:

(A) Sc3+ (B) Fe3+

(C) Cr3+ (D) Co3+

[Atomic number: Fe = 26, Sc = 21, Cr = 24, Co = 27]

3.
Hoffmann Bromamide degradation reaction is given by:

(A) ArNO2 (B) ArNH2

(C) ArCONH2 (D) ArCH2NH2

4.
In the Haworth structure of the following carbohydrate, various carbon atoms have been numbered. The anomeric carbon is numbered as:

(A) 1

(B) 2

(C) 3

(D) 5.
The value of Henry’s constant KH is:

(A) greater for gases with higher solubility

(B) greater for gases with lower solubility

(C) constant for all gases

(D) not related to the solubility of gases

6.
Out of the following statements, the incorrect statement is:

(A) La is actually an element of transition series.

(B) Zr and Hf have almost identical atomic radii because of lanthanoid contraction.

(C) Ionic radius decreases from La3+ to Lu3+ ion.

(D) Lanthanoids are radioactive in nature.

7.
Out of 2-Bromobutane, 1-Bromobutane, 2- Bromopropane and 1-Bromopropane, the molecule which is chiral in nature is:

(A) 2-Bromobutane (B) 1-Bromobutane

(C) 2-Bromopropane (D) 1-Bromopropane

8.
In the given reaction sequence, the structure of Y would be:

(A)

(B)

(C) (D)

9.
The product of the oxidation of I with MnO4 in alkaline medium is:

(A) IO–4 (B) I2

(C) IO– (D) IO–3

10.
Polyhalogen compounds have wide application in industries and agriculture. DDT is also a very important polyhalogen compound. It is a:

(A) greenhouse gas

(B) fertilizer

(C) biodegradable insecticide

(D) non-biodegradable insecticide 2025 Previous Year Questions (Set-3)

[2]

11.
What amount of electric charge is required for the reduction of 1 mole of MnO4 into Mn2+?

(A) IF (B) 5F

(C) 4F (D) 6F

12.
Alkenes are formed by heating alcohols with cone.
H2SO4. The first step in the reaction is:

(A) formation of carbocation

(B) formation of ester

(C) protonation of alcohol molecule

(D) elimination of water

For questions number 13 to 16, two statements are given – one labelled as Assertion and the other labelled as Reason. Select the correct answer to these questions from the codes (A), (B), (C) and (D) as given below:
(A) Both Assertion and Reason are true and Reason is the correct explanation of the Assertion.
(B) Both Assertion and Reason are true, but Reason is not the correct explanation of the Assertion.
(C) Assertion is true, but Reason is false.
(D) Assertion is false, but Reason is true.

13.
Assertion: Electrolysis of aqueous NaCl gives H2 at cathode and Cl2 at anode.

Reason: Chlorine has higher oxidation potential than H2O.

14.
Assertion: Cuprous salts are diamagnetic.

Reason: Cuprous ion has completely filled 3d- orbitals.

15.
Assertion: n-Butyl chloride has higher boiling point than n-Butyl bromide.

Reason: C – Cl bond is more polar than C – Br bond.

16.
Assertion: Acetanilide is less basic than aniline.

Reason: Acetylation of aniline results in decrease of electron density on nitrogen.

Section-B 17.
(A) Reactant ‘A’ underwent a decomposition reaction. The concentration of ‘A’ was measured periodically and recorded in the table given below:
Time/Hours [A]/M 0.40 1 0.20 2 0.10 3 0.05

Based on the above data, predict the order of the reaction and write the expression for the rate law.
OR

(B) The reaction between H2 (g) and I2 (g) was carried out in a sealed isothermal container. The rate law for the reaction was found to be:

Rate = k[H2] [I2]

If 1 mole of H2 (g) was added to the reaction chamber and the temperature was kept constant, then predict the change in rate of the reaction and the rate constant.

18.
PtCl4 . 2KCl doesn’t give precipitate of AgCl with AgNO3 solution. Write the structural formula and IUPAC name of the complex.

19.
Define fuel cell. Give two advantages of fuel cell over ordinary cell.

20.
Write the structures of the main products of the following reactions:

(a)

(b)

21.
What is meant by essential amino acids? Why are amino acids amphoteric in nature?

Section-C 22.
(a) Account for the following:

(i) Allyl chloride is hydrolysed more readily than n-propyl chloride.

(ii) Isocyanides are formed when alkyl halides are treated with silver cyanide.

(iii) Methyl chloride reacts faster with OH ion in SN2 reaction than t-butyl chloride.
OR

(b) Complete the following reactions by writing the structural formulae of ‘A’ and ‘B’:

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

23.
Calculate the cell voltage of the voltaic cell which is set up by joining following half-cells at 25C:

Al/Al3+ (0·001 M) and Ni/Ni2+ (0·1 M)

Given:
2 Ni /Ni E 0.25 V, +  = − 3 Al /Al E 1.66 V +  = −

[3]

24.
Give explanation for each of the following observations:

(a) With the same d-orbital configuration (d4), Mn3+ ion is an oxidising agent whereas Cr2+ ion is a reducing agent.

(b) Actinoid contraction is greater from element to element than that among lanthanoids.

(c) Transition metals form large number of interstitial compounds with H, B, C and N.

25.
An aqueous solution of NaOH was made and its molar mass from the measurement of osmotic pressure at 27C was found to be 25 g mol–1. Calculate the percentage dissociation of NaOH in this solution.

[Atomic mass: Na = 23 u, O = 16 u, H = 1 u]

26.
Arrange the following compounds as asked:

(a) in decreasing order of pKb, values

C2H5NH2, (C2H5)2NH, C6H5NHCH3, C6H5NH2

(b) increasing order of boiling point

C2H5OH, C2H5NH2, (CH3)2NH

(c) increasing order of solubility in water

C6H5NH2, (C2H5)2NH, C2H5NH2

27.
An aromatic compound ‘A’ with molecular formula C8H8O gives positive 2, 4-DNP test. It gives yellow precipitate, of compound ‘B’ on treatment with sodium hypoiodite. Compound ‘A’ does not react with Tollen’s or Fehling’s reagent; on drastic oxidation with KMnO4 it forms a carboxylic acid ‘C’.
Elucidate the structures of A, B and C. Also give their IUPAC names.

28.
(a) Can sodium ethoxide and t-butyl chloride be used for the preparation of t-butyl ethyl ether?
Give suitable explanation. Justify your answer by suggesting the appropriate starting material required for preparation of t-butyl ethyl ether.

(b) Give the IUPAC name of above mentioned ether.

Section-D The following questions are case-based questions. Read the case carefully and answer the questions that follow.
29.
According to the generally accepted definition of the ideal solution there are equal interaction forces acting between molecules belonging to the same or different species. (This is equivalent to the statement that the activity of the components equals the concentration.) Strictly speaking, this condition is fulfilled only in exceptional cases for mixtures (optical isomers, isotopic mixtures of an element, hydrocarbon mixtures). It is still usual to talk about ideal solutions as limiting cases in reality since very dilute solutions behave ideally with respect to the solvent. This view is further supported by the fact that Raoult’s law empirically found for describing the behaviour of the solvent in dilute solutions can be deduced thermodynamically via the assumption of ideal behaviour of the solvent.

Answer the following questions:

(a) Give one example of miscible liquid pair which shows negative deviation from Raoult’s law.
What is the reason for such deviation?

(b) (i) State Raoult’s law for a solution containing volatile components.
OR

(ii) Raoult’s law is a special case of Henry’s law. Comment.

(c) Write two characteristics of an ideal solution.

30.
Ribose and 2-deoxyribose have an important role in biology. Among the most important derivatives are those with phosphate groups attached at the 5 position. Mono-, di- and tri-phosphate forms are important, as well as 3-5 cyclic monophosphates.
Purines and pyrimidines form an important class of compounds with ribose and deoxyribose. When these purine and pyrimidine derivatives are coupled to a ribose sugar, they are called nucleosides.

Answer the following questions:

(a) What products would be formed when DNA is hydrolysed? How is DNA different from RNA with reference to a structure?

(b) Differentiate between nucleotide and nucleoside.

(c) (i) Mention two important functions of nucleic acid.
OR

(ii) Name the linkage which joins two nucleotides. Name the base that is found in nucleotide of RNA but not in DNA.

Section-E 31.
(a) (i) Complete the following reactions by writing the structure of the main products:

(I)

(II) (CH3)2Cd + 2CH3COCl ⎯→

(III)

(ii) Give simple chemical test to distinguish between the following pairs of compounds:

(I) Ethyl benzoate and benzoic acid

(II) Propanal and propanone

[4]

OR

(b) (i) Complete each synthesis by giving missing starting material, reagent or products:

(I)

(II)

(III)

(ii) Carry out the following conversions:

(I) Benzaldehyde to Benzophenone

(II) Benzaldehyde to 3-phenyl propanol

32.
(a) (i) Give reasons:

(I) [Ni(CO)4] is diamagnetic whereas (NiCl4]2– is paramagnetic. [Atomic number: Ni = 28]

(II) CO is a stronger complexing agent than NH3.

(III) The trans isomer of complex (Co(en)2Cl2]+ is optically inactive.

(ii) Using Crystal Field theory, write the number of unpaired electrons in octahedral complexes of Fe3+ in the presence of:

(I) Strong field ligand

(II) Weak field ligand

[Atomic number : Fe = 26] OR

(b) (i) Name the type of isomerism exhibited by the following compounds. Also draw their corresponding isomers.

(I) [Co(NH3)6] [Cr(CN)6]

(II) [Co(en)3]3+

(III) [Co(NH3)3(NO2)3)

(ii) Differentiate between weak field and strong field ligands. How does the strength of the ligand influence the spin of the complex?

33.
(a) (i) The initial concentration of N2O5 in the first order reaction:

N2O5(g) → 2NO2(g) + 2 1 O (g) 2

was 1·2 × 10–2 mol L–1. The concentration of N2O5 after 60 minutes was 0·2 × 10–2 mol L–1. Calculate the rate constant of the reaction at 318 K. [log 6 = 0·778]

(ii) Account for the following:

(I) We cannot determine the order of a reaction by taking into consideration the balanced chemical equation.

(II) A bimolecular reaction may become kinetically of first order under a specified condition.
OR

(b) (i) The rate of the chemical reaction doubles for an increase of 10 K in absolute temperature from 298 K.
Calculate activation energy (Ea).

[2·303 R = 19·15 JK–1 mol–1, log 2 = 0·3]

(ii) For a reaction:

I 2 2H O 2H O − ⎯⎯→ +

The proposed mechanism is as given below:

(I) H2O2 + I– ⎯→ H2O + IO– (slow)

(II) H2O2 + IO ⎯→ H2O + I– + O2 (fast)

(1) Write rate law for the reaction.

(2) Write the overall order and molecularity of the reaction.

◼◼◼

[5]

SPACE FOR ROUGH WORK