First Edition January 2007 Pausa 1928 Reprinted November 2007, December 2008, January 2010, January 2011, January 2012, January 2013, November 2013, December 2014, December 2015, February 2017 February 2018, January 2019, August 2019, March 2020, July 2021, February 2022 Revised Edtion October 2022 Kartika 1944 Reprinted March 2024 Chaitra 1946 December 2024 Pausa 1946 February 2026 Phalguna 1947 PD 130T HK © National Council of Educational Research and Training, 2007, 2022 ` 130.00 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade, be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect and should be unacceptable.
Publication Team Head, Publication : M.V. Srinivasan Division Chief Editor : Bijnan Sutar Chief Business : Amitabh Kumar Manager Chief Production : Deepak Jaiswal Officer (In charge) Assistant Editor : R.N. Bhardwaj Assistant Production : Deepak Kumar Officer Cover and Layout Nidhi Wadhwa OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION DIVISION, NCERT Campus Sri Aurobindo Marg New Delhi 110 016 Phone : 011-26562708 108, 100 Feet Road Hosdakere Halli Extension Banashankari III Stage Bengaluru 560 085 Phone : 080-26725740 Navjivan Trust Building P.O.Navjivan Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone : 079-27541446 CWC Campus Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop Panihati Kolkata 700 114 Phone : 033-25530454 CWC Complex Maligaon Guwahati 781 021 Phone : 0361-2674869 ISBN 81-7450-648-9 12085 – CHEMISTRY PART I Textbook for Class XII Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT watermark Published at the Publication Division by the Secretary, National Council of Educational Research and Training, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016 and printed at Laxmi Offset Printers, G- 114-115, Heerawala Industrial Area, Kanota, Agra Road, Jaipur Reprint 2026-27

FOREWORD The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005 recommends that children’s life at school must be linked to their life outside the school.
This principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our system and causes a gap between the school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these measures will take us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred system of education outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that, given space, time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with the information passed on to them by adults.
Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored.
Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat children as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in implementing the annual calender so that the required number of teaching days are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of curricular burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages with greater consideration for child psychology and the time available for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and space to opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in small groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development committee Reprint 2026-27

iv responsible for this book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory group in science and mathematics, Professor J.V. Narlikar and the Chief Advisor for this book, Professor B. L. Khandelwal for guiding the work of this committee. Several teachers contributed to the development of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals for making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions and organisations which have generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material and personnel. As an organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement in the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which will enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.
Director New Delhi National Council of Educational 20 November 2006 Research and Training Reprint 2026-27

v RATIONALISATION OF CONTENT IN THE TEXTBOOKS In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content load on students. The National Education Policy 2020, also emphasises reducing the content load and providing opportunities for experiential learning with creative mindset. In this background, the NCERT has undertaken the exercise to rationalise the textbooks across all classes.
Learning Outcomes already developed by the NCERT across classes have been taken into consideration in this exercise.
Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the following:
• Overlapping with similar content included in other subject areas in the same class • Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the same subject • Difficulty level • Content, which is easily accessible to students without much interventions from teachers and can be learned by children through self-learning or peer-learning • Content, which is irrelevant in the present context This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out the changes given above.

vi Reprint 2026-27

vii PREFACE Chemistry has made a profound impact on the society. It is intimately linked to the well-being of human kind. The rate of advancements in chemistry is so high that curriculum developers continuously look for strategies to cope with these advancements. Also, the students have to be inspired to be the future leaders who would make fundamental contributions. The present textbook is a sincere effort in this direction.
The structure of the textbook, presented in two parts, comprises of sixteen Units. Although the titles of various Units indicate a sort of compartmentalisation into physical, inorganic and organic chemistry, readers will find that these sub-disciplines have been intermingled, at least to a certain extent, to have a unified approach to the subject. The approach of presentation of the subject matter discourages students from rote memorisation. The subject has in fact, been organised around the laws and principles of chemistry. As students master these laws and principles, they will soon get to the point where they can predict much of what will come.
Efforts have been directed towards making the subject stimulating and exciting by references to the historical developments and its usefulness to our lives, wherever appropriate. The text is well illustrated with examples from surrounding environment to facilitate grasping of the qualitative and quantitative aspects of the concept easily. Physical data are given in SI units throughout the book to make comparison of various properties easier. IUPAC system of nomenclature has been followed along with the common system.
Structural formulae of chemical compounds showing functional/coordinating groups in different colours are drawn using electronic system. Each Unit has a good number of examples, as illustrations, with their solutions and some intext questions, the answers of some of which are given at the end of the Unit.
The end of Unit exercises are designed to apply important principles and provoke thinking process to solve them. Answers of some of these exercises are given at the end of the book.
A variety of materials, e.g., biographical sketches of some scientists, additional information related to a particular topic, etc., is given in boxes with a deep yellow coloured bar. This boxed material with a 'deep yellow bar' is to bring additional life to the topic. However, it is non-evaluative. The structures of some of the more complex compounds incorporated in the book are for understanding their chemistry. As their reproduction would lead to memorisation, it is also a non-evaluative portion of the text.
The information part has been significantly reduced and, wherever possible, it has been substantiated with facts. However, it is necessary for students to Reprint 2026-27

viii be aware of commercially important chemicals, their process of manufacture and sources of raw materials. This leads to descriptive material in the book.
Attempts have been made to make descriptions of such compounds interesting by considering their structures and reactivity. Thermodynamics, kinetics and electrochemical aspects have been applied to chemical reactions which should be beneficial to students for understanding why a particular reaction happened and why a particular property is exhibited by the product. There is currently great awareness of environmental and energy issues which are directly related to chemistry. Such issues have been highlighted and dealt with at appropriate places in the book.
A team of experts constituted by the NCERT has developed the manuscript of the book. It gives me great pleasure to acknowledge the valuable contribution of all the members of this team. I also acknowledge the valuable and relentless contribution of the editors in bringing the book to the present shape. I also acknowledge with thanks the dedicated efforts and valuable contribution of Professor Brahm Parkash, who not only coordinated the entire programme but also actively involved in writing and editing of this book. Thanks are also due to the participating teachers and subject experts of the review workshop for their contribution, which has helped us to make the book learner friendly.
Also, I thank the technical and administrative staff of the NCERT for their support in the entire process.
The team of this textbook development programme hopes that the book stimulates its readers and makes them feel the excitement and fascination for this subject. Efforts have been made to bring out this book error-free.
Nevertheless, it is recognised that in such a book of complexity, there could inevitably be occasional errors. It will always be a pleasure to hear about them from readers to take necessary steps to rectify them.
B.L. KHANDELWAL Reprint 2026-27

ix Elements, their Atomic Number and Molar Mass TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE CHAIRMAN, ADVISORY GROUP FOR TEXTBOOKS IN SCIENCE AND MATHEMATICS J.V. Narlikar, Professor Emeritus, Chairman, Advisory Committee, Inter University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics (IUCAA), Ganeshkhind, Pune University Campus, Pune CHIEF ADVISOR B.L. Khandelwal, Professor, Director, Disha Institute of Management and Technology, Raipur, Chhattisgarh. Formerly Chairman, Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi MEMBERS A.S. Brar, Professor, Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi A.Q. Contractor, Professor, Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Powai, Mumbai Alka Mehrotra, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi Anjni Koul, Lecturer, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi Brahm Parkash, Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi I.P. Agarwal, Professor, DESM, Regional Institute of Education, NCERT, Bhopal, M.P.
K.K. Arora, Reader, Department of Chemistry, Zakir Hussain College, University of Delhi, New Delhi K.N. Upadhayaya, Head (Retired), Department of Chemistry, Ramjas College, Delhi University, Delhi Kavita Sharma, Lecturer, DEE, NCERT, New Delhi M.P. Mahajan, Professor, Department of Chemistry, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, Punjab M.L. Agarwal, Principal (Retired), Kendriya Vidyalaya, Jaipur, Rajasthan Puran Chand, Professor, Joint Director (Retired), CIET, NCERT, New Delhi R.A. Verma, Vice Principal, Shaheed Basant Kumar Biswas Sarvodaya Vidyalaya, Civil Lines, New Delhi R.K. Verma, Professor, Department of Chemistry, Magadh University, Bihar R.K. Prashar, Lecturer, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi R.S. Sindhu, Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi S.K. Gupta, Reader, School of Studies in Chemistry, Jiwaji University, Gwalior, M.P.

x S.K. Dogra, Professor, Dr B.R. Ambedkar Centre for Biomedical Research, University of Delhi, Delhi Sarabjeet Sachdeva, PGT, (Chemistry), St. Columbas School, New Delhi S. Badhwar, Lecturer, The Daly College, Indore, M.P.
V.N. Pathak, Professor, Department of Chemistry, University of Rajasthan, Jaipur, Rajasthan Vijay Sarda, Reader, Department of Chemistry, Zakir Hussain College, University of Delhi, New Delhi V.K. Verma, Professor, (Retired), Institute of Technology, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, U.P.
V.P. Gupta, Professor, DESM, Regional Institute of Education, NCERT, Bhopal, M.P.
EDITORIAL COMMITTEE B.L. Khandelwal Brahm Parkash K.N. Upadhayaya K.K. Arora R.S. Sindhu Vijay Sarda MEMBER-COORDINATOR Brahm Parkash, Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi Reprint 2026-27

xi ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) gratefully acknowledges the valuable contributions of the individuals and organisations involved in the development of Chemistry textbook for Class XII. The acknowledgements are also due to the following practicing teachers and subject experts for reviewing the draft manuscript and giving useful suggestions for its improvement in a workshop: Dr D.S. Rawat, Department of Chemistry, University of Delhi, Delhi; Dr Mahendra Nath, Reader, Chemistry Department, University of Delhi, Delhi; Dr Sulekh Chandra, Reader, Zakir Hussain College, New Delhi; Ms Ameeta K., PGT (Chemistry), Vidyalaya No. 3, Patiala Cantt (Pb.); Dr G.T. Bhandge, Professor and Head, DESM, Regional Institute of Education, Mysore; Dr Neeti Mishra, Senior Lecturer, Department of Chemistry, Acharya Narendra Dev College, New Delhi; Dr. S.P.S. Mehta, Department of Chemistry, Kumaun University, Nainital (UA); Dr N.V.S. Naidu, Assistant Professor (Chemistry), SVU College of Mathematics and Physical Sciences, S.V. University, Tirupati (A.P.); Dr A.C. Handa, Hindu College, Delhi University, Delhi; Dr A.K. Vashishtha, G.B.S.S.S. Jafrabad, Delhi; Dr Charanjit Kaur, Head, Department of Chemistry, Sri Sathya Sai College for Women, Bhopal, P.O.
Habibganj; Ms Alka Sharma, PGT (Chemistry), S.L.S. DAV Public School, Mausam Vihar, Delhi; Dr H.H. Tripathy, Reader (Retired), Regional Institute of Education, Bhubaneswar; Shri C.B. Singh, PGT (Chemistry), Kendriya Vidyalaya No. 2, Delhi Cantt, Delhi; Dr Neeti Mishra and Dr Sunita Hooda, Acharya Narendra Dev College, Delhi University, New Delhi.
The Council also thanks the Members of Editorial Committee for their unrelenting efforts in editing the manuscript and bringing it to the present shape.
The Council also acknowledges the contribution of Shri Vijay Singh, Shri Narender Kr. Verma, DTP Operator; Dr K.T. Chitralekha, Copy Editor;
Shri Abhimanyu Mohanty, Proof Reader ; Shri Deepak Kapoor, Incharge, Computer Station in shaping this book.

CONTENTS FOREWORD iii RATIONALISATION OF CONTENT IN THE TEXTBOOKS v PREFACE vii Unit 1 Solutions 1.1 Types of Solutions 1.2 Expressing Concentration of Solutions 2 1.3 Solubility 5 1.4 Vapour Pressure of Liquid Solutions 9 1.5 Ideal and Non-ideal Solutions 13 1.6 Colligative Properties and Determination of Molar Mass 15 1.7 Abnormal Molar Masses 23 Unit 2 Electrochemistry 31 2.1 Electrochemical Cells 32 2.2 Galvanic Cells 33 2.3 Nernst Equation 36 2.4 Conductance of Electrolytic Solutions 41 2.5 Electrolytic Cells and Electrolysis 51 2.6 Batteries 54 2.7 Fuel Cells 56 2.8 Corrosion 57 Unit 3 Chemical Kinetics 61 3.1 Rate of a Chemical Reaction 62 3.2 Factors Influencing Rate of a Reaction 66 3.3 Integrated Rate Equations 71 3.4 Temperature Dependence of the Rate of a Reaction 78 3.5 Collision Theory of Chemical Reactions 82 Reprint 2026-27

xiv Unit 4 The d-and f-Block Elements 89 4.1 Position in the Periodic Table 90 4.2 Electronic Configurations of the d-Block Elements 90 4.3 General Properties of the Transition Elements (d-Block) 92 4.4 Some Important Compounds of Transition Elements 105 4.5 The Lanthanoids 108 4.6 The Actinoids 111 4.7 Some Applications of d- and f-Block Elements 113 Unit 5 Coordination Compounds 118 5.1 Werner's Theory of Coordination Compounds 118 5.2 Definitions of Some Important Terms Pertaining to 121 Coordination Compounds 5.3 Nomenclature of Coordination Compounds 122 5.4 Isomerism in Coordination Compounds 125 5.5 Bonding in Coordination Compounds 128 5.6 Bonding in Metal Carbonyls 135 5.7 Importance and Applications of Coordination 136 Compounds Appendices 141 Answers to Some Questions in Exercises 154 Reprint 2026-27